The Crocus Flower: Its Meanings & Symbolism
The crocus is one of the first flowers to emerge in the spring. It is often referred to as the light bulb flower because it looks like a bright light bulb until the petals unfurl into the cup shaped flower. It is no wonder it has a reputation as a symbol of cheerfulness and glee as it brings the landscape alive with color after a long winter.
What Does the Crocus Flower Mean?
The crocus is a symbol of . . .
Cheerfulness
Gladness
Youthfulness
Mirthfulness
Glee
The crocus flower is primarily associated with the mirthfulness and glee associated with youth. This flower has an uplifting and cheerful affect.
Etymological Meaning of the Crocus Flower
There are several theories to explain how the crocus flower got its name.
Latin Origins
:The crocus is a genus of flowers that derived its name from the Latin word crocatus, which means saffron yellow. Saffron is a spice derived from the saffron crocus (Crocus sativus ). It is one of 80 species of the genus crocus, says
The Flower Expert
. While not all crocus species produce saffron, they are all similar in appearance and share the name.
Greek Origins:
Other sources claim the crocus earned it name from the Greek word for thread after the golden fiber used to make saffron.
Greek Legend:
According to Greek legend, Crocus was the name of a Greek noble youth who feel deeply in love with Smilax, a beautiful shepherdess. When the gods forbade his marriage to Smilax, poor Crocus killed himself in deep sorrow. Upon discovering his death, Smilax was heart-broken and could not stop crying. The Goddess Flora took pity on the distraught Smilax and turned them both into plants. Crocus was turned into the crocus flower while Smilax was turned into a vine. It is said that the Greeks used the vines to weave together garlands of crocus flowers as wedding decorations.
Symbolism of the Crocus Flower
The crocus has long been a symbol of youthfulness and cheerfulness. The flower was used by ancient Greeks to ward off the fumes of liquor by weaving the crocus flower into wreaths for the head. The Egyptians also used crocus flowers to dispel the fumes from intoxicating liquors by placing a spray of flowers on wine glasses.
The ancient Romans were so fond of the fragrance of the crocus that they devised an apparatus to emit a fine spray of its scent on guests as they entered banquets. The fragrance of the crocus was thought to inspire love was even believed to bloom at midnight on Valentine’s Day.
Crocus Flower Color Meanings
The crocus flower can be white, yellow and shades of purple. Although there is no specific symbolism associated with the color of the bloom, there are universal color meanings.
White
– Purity, Innocence and Truth
Purple
– Dignity, Pride and Success
Yellow
– Cheerfulness and Joy
Meaningful Botanical Characteristics of the Crocus Flower
Saffron from the crocus flower is used as a spice to season foods, and is also known as an anti-carcinogenic and an antioxidant and boosts the immune system. Its fragrance is used in perfumes and cosmetics.
Special Occasions for the Crocus Flowers
The crocus is the perfect flower for spring bouquets and is appropriate as a gift between friends or to celebrate birthdays and other special occasions. It is an appropriate flower for young girls.
The Crocus Flower’s Message Is:
The crocus flower’s message is one of joy and cheerfulness that celebrates the return of spring.