The Daisy Flower: It’s Meanings and Symbolism
When someone is talking about a daisy, what specifically do they mean? Usually, they just mean a small white round flower with a round yellow or blue center. When botanists refer to daisies, they mean an entire group of plant species in the plant family called Asteraceae, which also includes aster flowers, ragweed and sunflowers. Daisies can be found in many parts of the world, including North America, Europe and Africa.
What Does the Daisy Flower Mean?
At first, it can seem that there can be as many meanings for daisies as there are species of daisies. However, the most generally accepted meanings are:
Innocence, especially with white daisies with yellow or pale centers.
Purity – also shown by daisies that are as white as possible.
New beginnings, which is why they are often found in bouquets for new mothers or as gifts for children.
True love – because each daisy flower is really two flowers blended together in harmony.
That the sender can keep a secret. Keeping a secret is one way a person can exhibit that they truly love another.
Entomological Meaning of the Daisy Flower
The modern English word daisy comes from an Old English word that’s impossible to spell and next to impossible to pronounce. The important thing is that the Old English word meant “day’s eye” because daisy flowers only opened during the daytime.
“Daisy” also became a slang word for something of excellent quality, as shown in books printed in the early 1800s. Over the generations, “that’s a daisy” became changed to “that’s a doozy.”
Symbolism of the Daisy Flower
In modern Paganism, daisies symbolize the sun just because they seem to appear like stars or suns.
In Victorian times, different species of daisies symbolized different things:
Michaelmas daisy
(Aster amellus)
symbolizes a farewell or a departure.
Gerber daises (those in the Gerbera genera) symbolize cheerfulness. They were often paired with ferns, which symbolize sincerity.
English daisy
(Bellis perennis)
symbolizes innocence. They were often paired with primroses, which is a symbol for childhood and/or moss, which symbolized mother love.
The Daisy Flower Facts
A single daisy flower is actually made up of two separate flowers. The center petals are one flower surrounded by the “rays” of another flower.
Daisies grow all year round.
Daisies are naturally resistant to many plant diseases and pests, which makes them perfect flowers for new gardeners.
Unfortunately, the English daisy
(Bellis perennis)
is considered a stubborn weed in North American lawns.
Meaningful Botanical Characteristics of the Daisy Flower
For centuries, children and really bored child minders have used daisies in order  to make daisy chains.
Daisy leaves are edible. Some people add them to their salads.
Wild daisy tea is said to be good for ailments of the throat, for putting on open wounds and as a “blood purifier” (whatever that means) but there aren’t any clinical studies to back up these traditional claims.
People who are allergic to ragweed are very likely to also be allergic to daisies or any products made from daisies.
The Daisy Flowers Message Is…
The daisy’s message is, ultimately, one of hope and renewal. In sending daisies, the sender hopes the viewer will see the world as they once did as a child. Just be sure not to send daisies to anyone with ragweed allergies.