Flower Color Meanings
Flowers have been used to convey messages of love and admiration for thousands of years. The message they convey depends on the type of flower, it’s color and the presentation. During the Victorian era, flowers were used to convey secret messages. While the message of flowers is typically not a secret in the United States today, there are some meanings associated with flower colors that you should keep in mind.
Red:
Red flowers traditionally speak of deep love and passion, but they can have other meanings too. Red flowers can also symbolize courage, respect, admiration and desire. Traditionally, red roses hold the power position for expressions of passion and love and are often presented to lovers and spouses on Valentine’s Day, birthdays and anniversaries. White baby’s breath often accompanies red roses to add a touch of romance to the floral bouquet.
Pink:
Pink is associated with a mother’s love, but they aren’t limited to gift giving for Mom. Pink flowers also represent unconditional love, gentleness, happiness, femininity and innocence. While pink carnations are a popular gift for Mother’s Day, they are appropriate for young girls too. Pink roses are often included in mixed bouquets or floral arrangements as a symbol of love.
Blue:
Blue colored flowers symbolize peace and tranquility and are often included in informal floral arrangements. They are appropriate between friends, colleagues or other associates and send a message to relax and enjoy a stress-free life. The mysterious blue rose is much sought after, but really doesn’t exist in nature. Some roses have a dusky blue cast, but deep blue roses are only the workings of fantasy. The iris is a popular blue flower that can be displayed alone or added to a colorful bouquet of mixed flowers.
Yellow:
Yellow flowers symbolize joy, happiness and the return of the sun in the spring, but they can also express pride or friendship. Yellow flowers are popular spring flowers that uplift the spirit and bring energy into the the home. Yellow flowers are appropriate for Mom or for friends and are often combined with other flowers to create springtime displays. The sunny, yellow sunflower makes a bolder statement as it bids farewell to summer and welcomes the fall. Yellow sunflowers are often included in showy autumn bouquets.
White:
White flowers traditionally represent innocence and purity and are often included in bridal bouquets and floral displays in religious ceremonies. They can also express sympathy when include in funeral or memorial flowers. A white lotus flower symbolizes spiritual perfection.
Lavender:
Lavender or violet flower meaning is grace, refinement and elegance, but they can also symbolize femininity. Lavender flowers can be added to mixed bouquets or paired with purple flowers for a monochromatic display that sets them apart. When paired with pink, they represent the ultimate expression of elegant femininity.
Orange:
Orange flowers are difficult to ignore. These bold flowers symbolize excitement and enthusiasm and work well for adding life to the party. Temper orange flowers with greenery or white flowers to mellow their bright color.
Green:
Green flowers and greenery represent renewal and rebirth. They can also symbolize good fortune and good health, as they are associated with springtime and new beginnings. Green flowers are best presented with other flowers in floral displays where their natural beauty is enhanced.
Purple:
Purple flowers are associated with royalty, dignity and success, but they can also symbolize admiration and fantasy. Try pairing purple flowers with yellow to enhance their beauty and add excitement.
Keeping the symbolism associated with the color of flowers in mind is always a good idea, but remember that the message your flowers send also depends on the type of flower you choose and your relationship to the receiver. A deep red rose may send the message that you love the recipient deeply, but a red poppy does not. A red poppy is an international symbol of remembrance, instead.