The Frangipani Flower: Its Meanings & Symbolism
Few tropical flowers are as delicate and pure looking as the Frangipani. Also commonly known as plumeria, this flower is native to South America and the Caribbean Islands. Even if you do not like in a climate zone warm enough for growing your own Frangipani, you can appreciate the rich scent and inspiring meaning of this bloom. Explore the history and power of this flower to find out how to use it as a potent symbol for personal development or making meaningful arrangements.
What Does the Frangipani Flower Mean?
A few different cultures have assigned meanings to the Frangipani flower, including modern American culture. These meanings include:
The strength to withstand tough challenges
Connecting with spirits and ghosts
Welcoming guests and inviting them to stay, due to its use in Hawaiian leis
Intense love and a lasting bond between two people
Immortality and spiritual devotion spread over multiple lifetimes
The Mayans and other Mesoamericans held this flower in very high esteem, as evidenced by the extensive carvings and paintings found that feature the blooms. However, it’s not currently known what exactly the plumeria means to them. The flower is still used today in religious rituals from Hindu, Buddhist, Balinese, and Swahili cultures.
Etymological Meaning of the Frangipani Flower
All Frangipani varieties fall under the scientific name of Plumeria. The Frangipani title was derived from a 16th century nobleman named Marquis Frangipani. He created an unique perfume that became very popular for scenting gloves, so when the flower arrived in Europe shortly afterwards and produced a scent very similar to his perfume, the name stuck.
Symbolism of the Frangipani Flower
Modern florists often recommend the Frangipani as a gift for someone who has endured many challenges because this plant must be heated over 500 degrees F to catch alight and start burning. Aside from a natural toughness, the delicate look of the flower makes it a symbol of grace, wealth, and perfection across Asia. However, many people in China and Vietnam consider it unlucky because of a folk belief that ghosts and other spirits live in the branches of the bush. As a wedding flower across southern India, it symbolizes the lasting bond between a married couple. Chinese people also use it to indicate affection and love when it’s inappropriate to speak about those feelings openly. Swahili poets also use it as a symbol of love, while Buddhist and Hindu followers consider it a sign of immortality and the continuation of the soul after death.
Frangipani Flower Color Meaning
This plant can produce flowers ranging from pure white to yellow, pink, red, and orange. Most of them share the same meanings, with the notable exception of the white flower in Indian culture. Red flowers aren’t used for weddings, so only white and cream colored Frangipani are considered appropriate for declaring love between two people.
Meaningful Botanical Characteristics of the Frangipani Flower
The Frangipani is mainly used as a source of perfume oil and for decorating around houses and temples. However, some researchers are using plumeria as potential treatments for a variety of health problems, including cancer and Alzheimer’s Disease.
Special Occasions for the Frangipani Flowers
Give the gift of a fragrant Frangipani for:
Weddings, especially between two very compatible people
Cheering up a friend after a difficult time
Honoring the spirits of loved ones
Reminding yourself of the immortality of the soul
The Frangipani Flower’s Message Is…
The Frangipani flower’s message is being delicate and beautiful doesn’t mean you are weak or incapable of rising to meet a challenge.