The Hyacinth Flower: It’s Symbolism & Meaning
The hyacinth flower is a lovely cool weather perennial plant formerly considered related to the lily and have now been placed in the family of asparagaceae. Growing wild in parts of Iran and Turkmenistan next to the Caspian Sea, these outstanding garden plants have evolved into a favorite of the spring garden. With many star shaped flowers per plant these flowers make a beautiful effect when planted in swaths and drifts of solid colors.  They are available in the palest pinks to the deepest magenta. There are also some beautiful blues including a soft baby blue and a striking, deep indigo blue. This fragrant spring flower is also available in red, burgundy, orange, white, yellow, purple and lilac.
What Does the Hyacinth Flower Mean
Sincerity (blue)
Victorian meaning is play or sport or engage in sport
Can also mean rashness (as in the behavior of the god Zephyr)
Jealousy (yellow)
Purple can mean sorrow for a wrong committed
Etymological Meaning of the Hyacinth Flower
Derived from Greek legend about a young beautiful boy named Hyakinthos who was slain by Zephyr, the god of the west wind. Hyacinth is also derived from the word jacinth meaning a blue gemstone.
Symbolism of the Hyacinth Flower
The hyacinth flower name has a most interesting meaning. In Greek mythology, Apollo the sun god and Zephyr the god of the west wind compete for a young boy’s affections. At one point Apollo is teaching Hyakinthos how to throw the discus and Zephyr gets so angry that he blows a gust of wind in Apollo’s direction, which sends the discus hurling back in the direction of Hyakinthos, striking and killing him.  Apollo, brokenhearted, notices that a flower springs up from the blood that was spilled and names the flower hyacinth in honor of the boy. This symbol of the hyacinth flower has remained pretty simple throughout history.
Hyacinth Flower Color Meanings
Color meaning does vary for each separate variety
Purple – asking for forgiveness or symbolizes deep regret
Yellow – yellow means jealousy in the world of hyacinths
White – means loveliness or prayers for someone
Red – play time or recreation
Meaningful Botanical Characteristics of the Hyacinth Flower
Fresh hyacinth bulbs are poisonous and irritating to the skin
Juice from this plant (wild hyacinth variety) is starchy and was at one time used as a glue
1
The dried root can be used as a styptic (stops bleeding) by contracting and closing tissues around a wound
Hyacinth juice mixed with lemon juice reduces inflammation of abscesses when applied topically
Hyacinth Flower Interesting Facts
Originally from the Mediterranean, Iran and Turkmenistan, now grown mainly in Holland
Each flower
color
has a
unique fragrance
– used extensively in perfume making
Bulbs are poisonous – contain oxalic acid which is so strong it can remove rust
Because the juice of the hyacinth plant is so naturally sticky, it was used as a book binding glue hundreds of years ago
Offer the Hyacinth Flower on These Occasions
I would offer the hyacinth flower to welcome spring or to symbolize a fresh start.
Offer this flower when you have acted thoughtlessly
Offer as a silent prayer of hope
The Hyacinth Flower’s Message Is:
Be happy and make time to play, but do not act rashly, as this can lead to deep regrets.