The Larkspur Flower: Its Meanings & Symbolism
Larkspur is an old-fashioned annual flower grown for its tall spires in shades of pink, red, yellow, blue, purple. These flowers make an excellent backdrop to flowerbeds as they grow 1 to 4 feet high, depending on the variety. They also make an impressive cut flower.
What Does the Larkspur Flower Mean?
Love
Affection
Strong Attachment
Lightness
Pure Heart
Sweet Disposition
Desire for Laughter
Etymological Meaning of the Larkspur Flower
The larkspur flower has recently been reclassified from the genus
Delphinium
to
Consolida
. Both
Consolida ambigua
and
Consolida orientalis
are grown and used as cut flowers. These flowers are thought to have earned the common name of larkspur because each bloom contains an elongated petal that looks like a spur, presumably like the hind claws of a meadowlark. The larkspur was originally classified as a Delphininium, which means dolphin, because the tiny buds on the flower look like a dolphin.
Symbolism of the Larkspur Flower
Greek Mythology:
According to Greek mythology after the death of Achilles, Ajax and Ulysses both tried to claim his arms. When the Greeks awarded them to Ulysses, Ajax went into a fit of anger that culminated in taking his own life with a sword. Ajax’s blood was spewed across the land. The larkspur flower sprang forth where Ajax’s blood fell to earth. The letters A I A – the initials of Ajax – are said to appear on the petals of the flowers as a remembrance of Ajax.
Native American Legend:
According to Native American Legend, the larkspur got its name from an angel or other celestial being that descended from the heavens. This being parted the sky and send down a spike made from pieces of the sky so he could climb down from heaven.  The rays of the sun dried the spike and scattered it in the wind. The tiny pieces of sky burst forth into the larkspur flowers wherever they touched the earth.
Christian Legend:
A Christian Legend states that after the crucifixion, Christ was moved to a cave and a boulder was placed in front of the door. While many doubted that he would rise again, a tiny bunny tried to remind them of Christ’s promise. When all ignored him, the bunny waited in the dark until Christ arose. The bunny spoke to Christ and rejoiced that he had kept his promise. Christ knelt down, showed the bunny a tiny blue larkspur flower, and told the bunny to behold the image of the bunny’s face in the flower. The face of the bunny in the larkspur flower symbolizes trusting in Christ and remains a symbol today.
Larkspur Flower Color Meanings
While all larkspur flowers symbolize joy and love, the meaning changes according to color symbolism.
Pink:
Fickleness
White:
Happiness
Purple:
First Love
Meaningful Botanical Characteristics of the Larkspur Flower
In the United States, the larkspur flower is used primarily as a cut flower or as a fragrance for aromatherapy or scenting cosmetics and candles. It is the birth flower for the month of July. Nearly all parts of the plant are poisonous to all animals except sheep. Larkspur has been used to control head and body lice, scorpions and other venomous creatures. It is also thought to protect you from ghosts and spirits and is often used in magical potions and elixirs.
Special Occasions for the Larkspur Flowers
Larkspur flowers are appropriate for many special occasions from birthdays to housewarmings. These flowers are often combined with other flowers in floral displays, making them suitable for family celebrations and other joyous occasions.
The Larkspur Flower’s Message Is…
The larkspur flower’s message is uplifting and joyous as these striking flowers add depth and dimension to floral displays.