Lavender Flower Meaning
Lavender flowers are spike-like flowers composed of multiple, small purple flowers or “florets” on long narrow stems. They have been valued for centuries for their physical beauty, soothing fragrance, healing properties, and multitude of uses. In addition to these characteristics, lavender flowers also possess a unique meaning.
What Does the Lavender Flower Mean?
Like all flowers, Lavender flowers have common meanings. Here is a list of some of the most common meanings for Lavender flowers:
Purity
Silence
Devotion
Caution
Serenity
Grace
Calmness
Etymological Meaning of the Lavender Flower
The English word lavender is generally believed to be derived from Old French
lavandre
, which itself is ultimately derived from the Latin
lavare
(to wash). It is thought to refer to the use of infusions of the plants. The botanic name
Lavandula
is considered to be derived from this and other European vernacular names for the plants. However the authenticity of this explanation is sometimes doubted, and the name may actually be derived from Latin
livere
, which means “blueish”.
The names widely used for some of the species, “English lavender”, “French lavender” and “Spanish lavender” are also less than accurate.. “English lavender” is commonly used for
L. angustifolia
, though some references say the proper term is “Old English Lavender”. The name “French lavender” may be used to refer to either
L. stoechas
or to
L. dentata
. “Spanish lavender” may be used to refer to
L. stoechas
,
L. lanata
or
L. dentata
.
Symbolism of the Lavender Flower
Lavender flowers are purple in color and the color purple is associated with the crown chakra, which is the energy center associated with higher purpose and spiritual connectivity. The crown or 7th chakra is located at the top of the head and the vibration of the crown is the highest vibration in the physical body. This symbolism is appropriate as the Lavender flower is often used for healing and raising our vibration to the highest level possible is the easiest path to healing.
Meaningful Botanical Characteristics of the Lavender Flower
Lavender is used extensively in aromatherapy and for minor injuries. Infusions are believed to soothe insect bites, burns, acne, inflammatory conditions and headaches. Bunches of lavender are also known to repel insects. In pillows, lavender seeds and flowers aid sleep and relaxation. An infusion of flowerheads added to a cup of boiling water is used to soothe and relax at bedtime.
Lavender oil is approved for use as an anxiolytic in Germany under the name
Lasea
. A survey paper on lavender and the nervous system published in 2013 states that, “there is growing evidence suggesting that lavender oil may be an effective medicament in treatment of several neurological disorders.”
Lavender Flower Color Meanings
While purple is the color of royalty, and pink the color of youth, lavender is femininity all grown up. It represents refinement, grace, and elegance. Lavender holds a sacred place in nature, and with its violet flowers is often considered the most delicate and precious. Any arrangement filled with these beautiful blossoms sends a message of feminine beauty.
Lavender Flowers are Good for These Occasions
Lavender flowers are grown in gardens and used for their aroma and medicinal uses more than they are used for special occasions. However, they are often used in arrangements of other similarly colored flowers and would be appropriate for any type of refined, elegant, and/or feminine occasion.
The Lavender Flower’s Message Is…
The Lavender flowers message is one of refinement and royalty! It’s beauty and aroma speak of grace, elegance and femininity.