5 Flowers that Symbolize Peace
Flowers have been used to represent certain emotions and meanings in many cultures throughout history, but it is perhaps the Victorian era that is best known for using flowers as a way to communicate indirectly. This way of sending messages was rather complicated with many flowers having more than one meaning or more than one flower being used to represent a certain thought. Here are five flowers that were traditionally regarded as symbols of peace.
1. Apple Blossoms
Apple blossoms precede the fruit coming on, and the trees bloom in the early spring. In addition to peace, apple blossoms were also used as a symbol of love and fertility. Some ancient cultures, such as the Celts, used the blooms as decorations in bedrooms and other romantic spaces. Apple trees require specific planting and care, but the end result is well worth it. Apple trees produce delicate blooms that come in varying shades of white and light pink, depending on the variety.
2. Basil
This common herb is grown on many chefs’ window sills, but it is also a symbol of peace in some cultures. Basil is thought to ward off negative spirits and symbolizes good wishes, wealth and a happy home. Basil comes in several varieties, including a deep purple, and will produce beautiful blooms if the buds aren’t pinched off. Basil thrives as an indoor potted plant and just needs lots of sun and moist soil.
3. Lavender
Another common herb known for the beautiful flowers it produces, lavender is associated with romantic relationships and is thought to bring peace to interactions with loved ones. It also symbolizes love, protection, happiness, sleep and devotion. The most common variety of lavender is English lavender, and it blooms in the spring. While most people think of lavender as purple, blooms can also be white, pink or blue. Lavender is another plant that does well in a pot that gets full sun. It needs soil that drains well and should only be watered when the soil is completely dry.
4. Violets
Representing peace, healing, loyalty and devotion, violets have had many meanings in different cultures throughout history. The Romans, for example, used it as a symbol of their affection for loved ones who had died and believed that flowers brought the deceased peace in the afterlife. The majority of violets are perennial plants, meaning they return every year and bloom in the mid to late summer. They require only moderate watering and do well in cooler climates.
5. White Poppies
Poppies traditionally symbolize peace and the end and remembrance of war, and this may have partially come from the fact that the flowers grew over the fallen bodies of soldiers who fought in the Great War in Northern France. Different colors have slightly different symbolism, but the white poppy’s pure, crisp tone is especially indicative of peace. Poppies have very unique blooms that are large and vibrant, and the plants have also traditionally been used for the medicinal properties. Poppies require adequate sun and limited watering and will continue to bloom if deadheaded regularly.
Giving a Flower Meaning Peace
Even though the meanings behind the various flowers have largely fallen out of common knowledge, it’s still possible to bring this nostalgic practice to modern relationships.
A full bouquet.
Nothing says grand gesture like sending someone a full bouquet at home or work. Try mixing a few other flowers with relevant meanings in for a special touch.
A single flower.
Leaving a single bloom of one of these flowers for the recipient to find is an understated take on this tradition.
A live plant.
Giving someone a live plant that represents peace means they can plant the flower and be reminded of peace and your thoughtfulness every time they see it.