Stargazer Flower: Its Meanings & Symbolism
While many of the plants called lilies sold in the flower arrangement business are not actually related to those plants, the Stargazer is a true lily. It is also one of the most popular and picturesque blossoms you can use for decorating your home or making the day of a loved one with a bouquet. The Stargazer flower is a potent symbol of many things, so you can easily make a second or third statement with your floral gift without saying a word.
What Does the Stargazer Flower Mean?
Unlike most flowers used for symbolism, the Stargazer has only been around for a few decades. Despite this, the flower has already symbolizes
Purity, especially in the spiritual sense instead of a religious one
Optimism and reaching your goals, even when they’re among the stars
Heaven on earth, or reaching a paradise in the afterlife
Limitless opportunities
Prosperity, abundance, and financial success
Celebrating the 30th wedding anniversary of a couple.
Etymological Meaning of the Stargazer Flower
The Stargazer name comes from Leslie Woodruff, who first developed the color and petal shape in 1978. He gave it that name because the flowers point up towards the sky like each bloom is watching the stars. The official name of the plant is Lilium ‘Stargazer’, since it’s a member of the true lily genus and the Stargazer variety is a trademarked variety name.
Symbolism of the Stargazer Flower
The Stargazer lily is a potent symbol because of its intense color and attractive blossom shape. Families often invest in bountiful bouquets of these flowers to add elegance and liveliness to a 30th anniversary party. Aside from symbolizing the everlasting love between a couple, the Stargazer means success in a financial sense too. You can also encourage your loved one or friend to stay optimistic when facing hard times by giving them a few of these flowers, especially the yellow and orange color varieties.
Stargazer Flower Color Meanings
The most popular Stargazer features a striking bright pink color scheme with dark pink, white and yellow specks dotted over the petals. Yellow versions are also available, which lend the flower more of a joyful and cheerful slant to the meaning. White is the third common color for this type of lily, and it carries a shared color meaning of purity and youth.
Meaningful Botanical Characteristics of the Stargazer Flower
The Stargazer is easy to grow and doesn’t need a lot of care to produce beautiful blooms. Grown commercially in California and South America, it produces a fragrance most people love. A few people suffer from a rare allergic reaction upon smelling the scent. Keep this lily and other true lilies away from kids and pets due to the toxic nature of the leaves and flowers.
Special Occasions for the Stargazer Flowers
Aside from a 30th anniversary, you should also invest in a bunch of Stargazers when your family home needs a breath of fresh air due to a pessimistic atmosphere. Keep a fresh vase of the flowers on your desk at work to stay motivated when working towards your future. Finally, consider using this bloom to celebrate the graduation of a high school or college student.
The Stargazer Flower’s Message Is…
The Stargazer flower’s message is to keep your eyes on the heavens instead of always staring at the ground. Stay positive and watch as the world changes around you.